.TH ASTOW 1 "2026-03-08" "astow" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
astow \- copy-based alternative to GNU stow
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B astow
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fIDIRS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B astow
manages a union of file system trees by copying files between a
.I stow directory
and a
.I target directory.
.PP
Unlike GNU stow,
.B astow
copies files by default rather than creating symlinks.
It also does not perform directory folding, which avoids the associated
class of subtle and potentially dangerous bugs.
.PP
The default stow directory is the current working directory and the target
directory is its parent.
For example, if the stow directory is
.IR ~/dotfiles ,
the target directory is
.IR ~/ .
Both directories can be overridden with the
.B \-d
and
.B \-t
options, making it possible to run
.B astow
from a directory other than the stow directory.
.PP
When
.I DIRS
is omitted, all non-hidden immediate subdirectories of the stow directory
are used.
Paths given as
.I DIRS
may be subtrees (e.g.\&
.IR pkg/etc/foo )
to restrict the operation to a subtree; the root component of such a path
still determines how files are mapped into the live directory.
Paths must not contain
.B ..
components.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d " " \fIDIR\fR ", " \-\-dir= \fIDIR\fR
Use
.I DIR
as the stow directory instead of the current working directory.
If
.B \-t
is not also given, the target directory defaults to the parent of
.IR DIR .
.TP
.BR \-t " " \fIDIR\fR ", " \-\-target= \fIDIR\fR
Use
.I DIR
as the target directory instead of the parent of the stow directory.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Simulate all operations without writing to, creating, or removing any files
on disk.
.TP
.B \-\-debug\-log\-fsops
Log every filesystem operation to
.I stderr
as it is executed.
.TP
.B \-h\fR,\fB \-\-help
Show a brief usage summary and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status [\fIDIRS\fR...]
Compare files in the stow directory to their counterparts in the target directory
and report any that are missing or differ in content.
Each differing file is printed on a line prefixed with either
.B [MISSING]
(file absent from target) or
.B [DIFFERS]
(file present but content differs).
Files that are identical in both locations produce no output.
.TP
.B push [\fIDIRS\fR...]
Copy files from the stow directory into the target directory.
Files absent from the target are created; files whose content differs are
overwritten.
Files already identical in both locations are left untouched.
Intermediate directories are created as needed.
.TP
.B pull [\fIDIRS\fR...]
Synchronise the stow directory from the target directory.
Files in the target directory whose content differs from the stow directory are
copied back into the stow directory, overwriting the stow copy.
Stow files whose counterpart is absent from the target are removed from
the stow directory.
To capture a file that exists in the target but not yet in the stow directory,
supply its path explicitly as a
.I DIRS
argument (e.g.\&
.BR "astow pull bash/.bashrc" ).
.B pull
will then copy it from the target into the stow directory, creating the
necessary intermediate directories.
.TP
.B symlink [\fIDIRS\fR...]
Create symlinks in the target directory pointing at the corresponding files in
the stow directory, rather than copying them.
Intermediate directories are created as needed.
.TP
.B delete [\fIDIRS\fR...]
Remove from the target directory every file that is present in the stow
directory.
Files already absent from the target are silently skipped.
.TP
.B manifest [\fIDIRS\fR...]
Print the path of every file in the specified packages, one per line,
relative to the stow directory root.
No filesystem operations are performed on the target directory.
.TP
.B diff [\fIDIRS\fR...]
For each file that is absent from the target or differs in content, run
.BR diff (1)
with flags
.B \-uN
comparing the target copy (or an empty file, if absent) against the stow
copy.
Output goes to
.IR stdout .
Files with identical content are omitted.
.SH EXAMPLES
Push all packages from the current stow directory to the target:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
cd ~/dotfiles
astow push
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show status of the
.I nvim
and
.I zsh
packages only:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow status nvim zsh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Dry-run a push to see what would be copied without touching anything:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow --dry-run push
.fi
.RE
.PP
View a unified diff of every file that has drifted from the stow directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow diff
.fi
.RE
.PP
Remove all target files managed by the
.I nvim
package:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow delete nvim
.fi
.RE
.PP
Capture a file from the target into the stow directory for the first time,
even though it has no existing stow counterpart:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow pull bash/.bashrc
.fi
.RE
.PP
Push from a stow directory that is not the current directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow \-d ~/dotfiles push
.fi
.RE
.PP
Push to an explicit target directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
astow \-d ~/dotfiles \-t /tmp/preview push
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All operations completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Execution was aborted due to a hard error (e.g.\& an invalid argument).
.TP
.B 2
Execution completed but one or more soft errors were encountered.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR stow (8),
.BR diff (1),
.BR cp (1),
.BR ln (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Written by the astow contributors.
